# 6.5 Feedlots 

When we discuss extensive livestock production the primary definition is that for the majority of the year the animals are grazing paddocks for their own feed and managers are not bringing the feed to them.  Some key elements determine how much pasture will grow in a given time period and how quickly it can grow.  These elements determine where different classes of stock may be managed and how many of them can be grazed in an area – the stocking density.

## 6.5.1  Feedlots

We cover feedlots in Animals in intensive production systems in semester 2 but it is important to note their important role in conjunction with the extensive industry here.  Feedlots play an important risk moderation role in the Australian beef industry as with large amounts of grain and roughage grown in Australia there is significant feed available for short term feeding of beef cattle to ensure a particular level of meat quality assurance but also as a place for stock to go during droughts for finishing that wasn't available to industry fifty years ago.  Feedlots can be small "opportunity" type feedlots that are used when grain prices are low and margins on fattening stock are high.  There are then a range of larger feedlots with the largest ones stocking several tens of thousands of animals at any one time.  This means that during the course of the year if they are running "short feeding" (60 day feeding programs for each group for example) they may have hundreds of thousands of cattle in the feedlot during any given year.   Some grazing enterprises background stock for feedlots by bringing various herds of animals together before they go into a feedlot and giving them relevant preventive health care before they go into the higher stocking rate.  This can significantly reduce disease and improve performance within the feedlot.  Different diets are provided to animals in a feedlot depending on what market they are being fattened for.  

The following video provides a brief introduction from the Australian Lot Feeders Association